First came the underwater remote-controlled robots, which attempted
and failed to activate the 450-ton blowout preventer, a valve at the
wellhead that was supposed to have automatically cut off the leak ﬁve
thousand feet below if it sensed a sudden change in pressure.
Then came the controlled burning of the oil pooled on the water’s
surface. On April 28, crews began an in situ burning, a technique in
which a ﬁve-hundred-foot-long boom is used to move concentrated
pockets of oil to a separate area where they are ignited. Other efforts
included dropping a variety of domes on the wellhead and attempt-
ing to bring oil to the surface for collection. But as the days passed,
the oil kept on ﬂowing. The well was ﬁnally plugged in late July of
that year, with mud and then, ﬁnally, cement. By the time BP was
able to cap the well, it had already belched 4.9 million barrels of oil,
or 205.8 million gallons, into the fragile ecosystem off the coast of
Louisiana. And there wasn’t a thing the average American could do
about it.
Apparently, the experts—the engineers in charge and those em-
ployed by the US government—couldn’t do much either. The result
was the largest manmade disaster in American history. Then, within
days of when the cement plug was ﬁnally inserted, President Obama
announced that two-thirds of the spilled oil had either evaporated or
been removed by cleanup crews.
Even the most credulous of oil industry experts had trouble
believing the effects of the disaster were reversed so easily. Regardless
of the reality, however, the perception of the Gulf oil spill was that
American ingenuity had failed in a time of great need. In the Ameri-
can tinkering paradigm, a brilliant individual should have emerged
and somehow found a brilliant solution sooner. But that didn’t hap-
pen. The incident ultimately lacked much-needed closure. Rather
than rise to the occasion with an ennobled, enlightened ingenuity,
America did its best to cover its tracks and suggest that the problem
wasn’t even really a problem.
12Wising Up about a Smartphone
In August 2010, Paul Krugman, the Nobel Prize–winning economist
and New York Times columnist, published a piece in the New York
Times titled “America Goes Dark.” He described how the United
States, “a country that once amazed the world with its visionary in-
vestments in transportation, from the Erie Canal to the Interstate
Highway System” was now dismantling its infrastructure. “Local
governments are breaking up roads they can no longer afford to
maintain,” Krugman wrote, “and returning them to gravel.”
Krugman’s main point was that the US government was not in-
vesting stimulus funds in the tools needed for our own economic
growth. Three decades of antigovernment rhetoric had convinced
many Americans that spending taxpayer funds on anything was a
waste of taxpayer funds. But government—the US government,
speciﬁcally—had built this country into an innovative economic
powerhouse by investing in “lighted streets, drivable roads and
decent schooling for the public as a whole.”
I would take Krugman’s point one step further and argue that the
American government and people helped the country grow both by
investing in innovation and by committing themselves to the tradi-
tional tinkerer spirit. A sophisticated, cutting-edge infrastructure
was the perfect crucible for the kind of innovation the United States
embodied.
In this book I would like to make a case for the continued im-
portance of the tinkerer in contemporary life and in the role he or
she will play in the future of the United States. This is not another
book for miserable white-collar workers praising the virtues of
manual labor. The point about the devolution of tinkering in Amer-
ican life is not that we have lost a physical connection to the work
that we do. It’s that the notion that we can ﬁx any problem or
achieve any goal that we set for ourselves has deteriorated into a
sanitized, corporatized version of what constitutes achievement.
13